[ Woman singing ]
[ Ominous music ]
[ Speaking German ]
NARRATOR:
May, 1 942.
As the spring
campaigning season opens,
the Red Army's victories of late 1 94 1
seem suddenly meaningless,
and Hitler's damaged confidence
receives a massive boost.
The hasty Soviet attack
in the south against Kharkov
is swallowed up
by a German counteroffensive.
Hundreds of thousands
of Soviet troops are captured,
destined for Nazi prison camps.
These are losses
the Red Army can ill afford.
Because Kharkov will become
the springboard
for Hitler's own summer assault
on the Caucasus.
The Führer is confident now,
certain that the Wehrmacht
can seize the vital oil centers
of Grozny and Baku.
And from late June,
his armies sweep south
into mountain country.
But Stalin has concentrated
Red Army reserves
to protect Moscow,
and the offensive
takes it by surprise.
lt is hurled into hasty retreat,
seeking refuge in the hills,
able only to sabotage the precious
oil fields it leaves behind.
And as German units advance,
there are some who greet them
as liberators,
entrusting nationalist dreams
to these new masters.
They will learn the tragic truth
soon enough.
But as it retreats and regroups,
the Red Army becomes stronger
and more coherent.
And the rolling thunder
of the Panzers, at first unstoppable,
is silenced by stubborn defense
on the only road
through the mountains to Baku.
But though the great refineries
are still working
for the Soviet people,
a new peril looms.
Two smaller German armies
have been advancing slowly east
towards the industrial city
of Stalingrad.
As Hitler's ambitions
are thwarted further south,
he sees a chance to cut all links
between Moscow and the Caucasus.
The city on the Volga
becomes his new prime target.
The vaunted German Sixth Army,
conqueror of Paris in 1 940,
spearheads the drive,
and again
the Red Army tumbles back.
For Soviet soldiers,
this could so easily be the end.
Even Stalin's son
has been captured,
and his image
on propaganda leaflets
adds credence to German claims
of imminent victory.
But Stalin will tolerate
no more rapid retreats,
and on the brink of catastrophe,
he resorts, as always, to terror.
Stalin's secret Order Number 22 7,
issued under his signature
in late July, 1 942.
This notorious document
makes any unauthorized retreat
punishable by death.
''Not one step back.''
Stalin means it literally.
And this unique footage
shows NKVD troops
putting his edict into practice.
They're known as blocking units.
Deployed just behind the troops,
they pass instant sentence
on any who disobey Order 22 7.
And the blocking troops themselves?
ln Stalin's world, almost anybody
can become a law enforcer --
young and old conscripts,
national minorities,
NKVD personnel.
And some blocking units can boast
an extraordinary collection
of talents.
Anna Bugrimova, on the left,
fought with them and knew them well.
[ Speaking Russian ]
lNTERPRETER:
The troops went into battle.
We were following them.
We were about 500 meters
behind them.
No one could turn and run back.
lf someone did, he would be shot
on the spot by our blocking units
or arrested
by the special division of NKVD.
l had the carbine.
And then my friends got a pistol
for me, and l threw away the carbine.
These Siberians were quite old.
Our blocking unit
was made up of Siberians,
former convicts who had robbed
banks and large factories.
They were serious criminals,
but they treated me well.
NARRATOR: Appropriate purveyors
of Stalin's bitter medicine,
enforcing the Supreme Commander's
will without hesitation or mercy.
And Stalin has introduced
another grim aid to discipline --
penal battalions.
Each of these convicts must serve
in the penal unit for three months,
not a day more,
but for many,
that will be too long.
Even petty transgressors --
pilferers, shirkers,
anyone who upsets an officer --
have reason to fear
the Red Army's field tribunals.
Guilty is always
their favorite verdict.
And the inevitable transfer
to penal service
is virtually a death sentence.
They are the first thrown
into every hopeless fight,
the first to face
every deadly firestorm.
Yet, they often fight well
and with rare commitment.
Soldiers with something to prove,
terrified, of course,
but desperate to wipe away
the stigma of their misdoings.
A battle wound is enough
to earn release.
But each casualty is carefully
examined by security officers
in case the damage
should be self-inflicted
or the work of blocking units.
The genuinely wounded will find
the forgiving words
''atoned with his own blood''
added to their records.
And the dead are granted
the same consolation,
though in life they are expendable.
True cannon fodder, their combat
achievements with penal units
are ignored by official records.
That policy still outrages
former Red Air Force pilot,
Artyom Anfinogenov.
lNTERPRETER: The pilots
from the penal squadrons were
sent on the most dangerous missions,
most important of all,
river crossings,
which were fundamental in deciding
the outcome of Stalingrad,
then to attack airfields
and large concentrations of tanks,
the three types of missions that
the penal squadrons were sent on.
But they were given
no official recognition
for these combat missions.
Normally, a pilot
would carry out a combat mission,
and normally, for each one,
he would get a credit.
For ground-attack squadrons,
it was the number of combat missions
that you undertook
that was important.
Fighter pilots would get a credit
for every dogfight
and enemy aircraft shot down.
But ground-attack pilots
would get a credit
for every combat mission,
and this would all count
towards the pilot's war record.
But the penal squadrons were not
credited with their combat missions,
so you would fly, you would fight,
you would hit the Germans,
but you would not get credit for it
until you were eventually wounded
or until the commander might
eventually judge
that you had served your term.
NARRATOR:
And for any pilot in action,
the first wound is usually the last.
They may be forgiven for thinking
that capture is the safest way
out of this war.
But though it is merciless, arbitrary,
and utterly dehumanizing,
Stalin's program
of unbending oppression
does galvanize the Red Army.
Suren Mirzoyan was a commando
with the 62nd Army
defending Stalingrad.
lNTERPRETER:
Some people think that Order 22 7
was a criminal order.
No! lt was vital
to the country's defense.
lt was an important,
galvanizing factor.
lf there hadn't been that order,
those in retreat who'd already
got used to falling back
would have continued.
But where could they go?
Stalin was right when he said
that beyond the Volga
there was nowhere further
for us to retreat.
One time, when they tried to capture
one of our commanders,
he stood up in the trench,
just stood there in the trench,
and showed them what he had.
He was a soldier.
But he was surrounded.
He was out of ammunition,
grenades, everything,
because he had spent it all.
So he got up, and
in an act of supreme defiance,
he pulled down his trousers
and said,
''Here, come and take this prisoner!''
NARRATOR:
But defiance alone
will not keep the enemy
out of Stalingrad.
By late August, they are
at the Volga to the north,
and the city is all but surrounded.
Hitler is proclaiming
a great triumph of arms.
German victory medals
have been struck.
And at first, Stalingrad
seems there for the taking.
But this is Stalin's city,
the very symbol
of his personal prestige,
and that is something
even women and children
are expected to defend.
[ Speaking Russian ]
lNTERPRETER: So we went across
the Volga to Krasnaya Sloboda,
right opposite the place
we're standing now.
We'd only been there a few days,
and then suddenly
this local policeman
started making regular calls on us
and demanding that my father and l
go back to Stalingrad at once.
He claimed that my father
was spreading unnecessary panic,
saying, ''You're a coward
and panic-spreader.
You have no right to be here,
and you should return back
to Stalingrad immediately.''
NARRATOR: The 62nd Army
is not yet deployed in the city,
and only a single blue-coated
NKVD division
takes the field against
the first attacking Panzers.
At its side, workers
from the local tractor factory,
armed with abundant defiance
but with very little else.
[ Speaking Russian ]
lNTERPRETER:
When we got to the front line,
this tank with no turret
went past us a few times.
lt was driven by a man
from the factory.
ln his patriotic fervor,
he hadn't had time to put a turret on.
And he had no cannon, either,
only a machine gun.
But our tractor-factory man was
determined to defend the motherland
with caterpillar tracks
and a machine gun alone.
But the Luftwaffe cares nothing
for such heroics.
During the last week of August,
it launches a campaign
of terror bombing.
For the first time, it attempts
the systematic destruction,
sector by sector,
of a Soviet city.
Wave after wave of aircraft
swoop over Stalingrad.
Factories, homes,
women and children --
they are all targets.
For five days and nights
the onslaught rages,
turning the city
into a gigantic bonfire.
And when the thunder finally abates,
50,000 lay dead.
Three times as many are injured,
victims of Hitler's Luftwaffe,
but also of the brutal regime
that forced so many of them
to remain.
Their home has become a chaos
of charred and mangled ruins.
Yet, for Stalingrad citizens,
the real nightmare
is only just beginning. . .
. . .because now the Wehrmacht
is moving in
to claim the rubble for its own.
As they inch through the suburbs,
German troops surely expect
a rapid conquest.
lnstead, they are entering
a savage killing ground
for a duel to the death
that will rank among the most terrible
in human experience.
For at their approach,
the ruins spring to furious life.
Soviet soldiers and citizens
do not even contemplate surrender.
A thousand desperate battles
erupt on the streets,
and a wild labyrinth of constantly
shifting front lines swamps the city.
Soon even the identification flags
will not be enough.
German bombers cannot hope
to distinguish friend from foe
as the inferno takes complete hold
of Stalingrad.
The front line might be a house,
an alley, a tramline or a wall.
And every street is a minefield,
virtually impossible
for tanks or big guns.
Soviet soldiers,
denied air and artillery support,
must fight eyeball-to-eyeball,
lives hanging on their wits,
their battle skills,
and their cunning.
[ Speaking Russian ]
Former Red Army marksman
Vassily Zaitsev.
lNTERPRETER: The fascist snipers
used to come here
to give the other Germans
covering fire
when they came to get water
from that small spring.
The Volga was only
a stone's throw away,
but the Nazis were dying of thirst.
So that is how this snipers duel
flared up.
All in all, it went on for three days.
But it ended with victory for us
in some five seconds.
The fascists would come
to the duel well prepared.
He'd already taken out
two of my snipers.
Then with the help
of a couple of others,
l finally managed to pick him off.
l would never have guessed what kind
of big shot had flown to Stalingrad,
but when we dragged him out,
we found he'd been the head
of the Berlin sniper school.
NARRATOR:
But there is heroism
beyond the black arts
of trench warfare.
This house is defended
by a single platoon
of Stalin's gladiators,
Sergeant Pavlov's platoon.
Completely surrounded by Germans,
Pavlov's men
hold this vital strong point
until relief comes 59 days later,
long enough for one woman,
one among many crowded
into the cellar,
to give birth amid the orgy of death
that is Stalingrad that autumn.
lNTERPRETER: The streets
were littered
with dead women and children,
their dismembered bodies burnt
or half-burnt.
That produced
a very strong effect on us.
We fought like wild animals
for every house, every piece of land.
We weren't afraid of anything.
Once, after the Germans
had taken a building near us,
a section under the command
of one of our sergeants went in
and in 2 4 hours had stabbed
the whole of their company.
And how did they do it?
They slaughtered all of them
with bare steel in that one night.
They took revenge
and really enjoyed it.
lt was as if they wanted to say
to the Germans,
''You decided to come here,
so it's here you'll stay.
None of you will ever
get back home.''
NARRATOR: Yet slowly, inevitably,
the 62nd Army is giving ground.
Reinforcements are still
trickling across the Volga,
but as the Wehrmacht prepares
to storm that slender lifeline,
it can only be held
at terrible cost.
Casualties are appalling,
and nurses must struggle
through a hail of fire to rescue them.
ln the magnificent spirit
of Soviet women in wartime,
they dutifully risk their own lives
for the lives of soldiers.
But their orders demand still more,
and many perish in the act
of saving priceless weapons.
The Volga crossing as reconstructed
by contemporary Soviet filmmakers.
Soviet reinforcements attempting
to reach the city scramble ashore,
escaping from one nightmare
into another.
And some days, the river runs red
with their blood.
Dr. Boris Perepechaev treated
casualties at the Volga crossing.
[ Speaking Russian ]
lNTERPRETER: Every night, launches
came over from the left bank,
put down boards,
unloaded fresh reinforcements,
and took back the wounded.
There were so many corpses there
that you just couldn't help
but step on them.
The whole embankment
was piled with corpses.
Sometimes there were wounded
among them as well.
So occasionally, you'd be walking
over these dead bodies,
and one of them
would suddenly let out a shout,
''Watch where you're going,
you clumsy oaf!''
Well, with all this going on,
one night l had
a bit of a mental slip,
though l didn't realize it
at the time.
l was walking along that riverbank,
and suddenly l remembered a song
from the film
Captain Grant's ChiIdren,
and l just started to sing it.
''There, where horses tread
on the corpses,
where the land is painted in blood.''
People started cursing
and swearing at me from all sides.
The Germans who were positioned
nearby must have heard all this,
because they started firing at us
with their heavy machine gun.
l fell flat on the ground.
l don't know who l fell on
or what l fell on, but l just fell.
l waited for a bit
till the launch came,
and then l left, unhurt.
NARRATOR: German forces now
control most of the Stalingrad area,
and Hitler is already claiming
total victory.
And though Soviet defenders
are giving everything,
the enemy is still pushing east
across the city.
General Chuikov,
in command of the 62nd Army,
mounts a skillful campaign,
but his outnumbered troops
cannot hope to stop the Wehrmacht.
And by early November,
it has cut a swath across Stalingrad,
splitting the 62nd Army in two.
ln a last desperate gesture,
Chuikov mounts assault after assault
on the Mamaev Mound,
a vital patch of high ground,
the very hub of the battle zone.
The hill changes hands
no less than eight times,
as Chuikov throws everything
into the fray,
every soldier
and anything that flies.
[ Speaking Russian ]
lNTERPRETER: An endless battle
was going on
and over Mamaev Mound.
Our troops were storming it again,
and the infantry, which was
climbing up, it needed air support.
When German bomber planes
appeared,
Khryukin, the local
air-force commander,
urgently called a fighter-plane
squadron to chase them off
and cover our infantry troops.
A squadron of seven planes --
l don't want to mention the squadron
captain's name -- took off,
and with an armada of German
bombers flying towards them,
they evaded the fighting,
turned off, and flew up the Volga.
Khryukin immediately ordered
the captain to be shot,
and as l read later in the official
report about the execution,
all the other pilots were sent
to the penal squadron.
l'll tell you, the aircraft losses
at Stalingrad were terrible.
Just terrible.
An average air-force regiment
might be at the front for a week
and then cease to exist.
That gives you some idea
how bad our losses were.
And the reasons --
Well, first and foremost,
the enormous intensity
and the importance
of the actual struggle itself.
Ultimately, it was a question of life
or death for our country and people.
On the other hand, everything was
thrown into it like into a furnace,
whether our regiment
was ready or not.
A hole in the line had to be filled,
so pilots like me
made up 1 00 regiments
consisting entirely of sergeants.
l was a sergeant, you understand.
1 00 regiments of sergeants
were given crash training
just before the war.
80o/o of them were at Stalingrad.
One fine day, just after we had
finished the summer course
at the pilot-training camp
in the Urals near Perm,
they drew up all graduated pilots
in ranks and gave a command.
All those with names
beginning with the letters ''A'' to ''K''
were to turn right and march
quickly back to the barracks.
And those beginning
with ''L'' to ''Z'' had to turn left
and quick march
to the quartermaster's stores
and from there
immediately go and join
the infantry troops at Stalingrad.
Thus it was that they sent
trained pilots
off to join the infantry
at Stalingrad.
And those pilots whose names
began with the letters ''A'' to ''K,''
with me among them,
because my name is Anfinogenov,
flew to the front.
So l flew to the front
with a grand total of just 3 hours,
40 minutes training in all.
NARRATOR:
Lydia Litvyak is a pilot
with one of three female
fighter groups in Stalingrad,
and a good one.
1 0 Luftwaffe aircraft have fallen
to her machine guns.
One more, and she will qualify
for the ultimate accolade,
Hero of the Soviet Union.
But then her lover,
flying with a neighboring squadron,
is killed,
and, as her brother recalls,
the loss destroys her.
lNTERPRETER: She used
to write us letters every day
on funny triangle-shaped
letter paper,
addressed to Mother in Europe.
ln the last letter, she wrote,
''Mother, l dreamt that l was standing
on the bank of a big, stormy river,
and my beloved Alyosha
was calling me from the other side.''
And Mother said,
''That's it. She is going to die.''
NARRATOR: And what
of the millions of Soviet citizens
away from the front line?
As propaganda fixes every eye
on the struggle for Stalingrad,
they respond
with whatever they can give --
their jewelry, their money,
anything to help preserve the lives
of husbands, brothers, and sons
trapped in the inferno.
They are all part of a monumental
national effort to save Stalingrad.
And at the heart
of the Soviet crusade,
hidden from Hitler's gaze,
one of the most astonishing
enterprises in the history of warfare.
Machinery and manpower
from the great industrial regions
of the western USSR
have been snatched
from the very jaws of Nazi invasion.
Now a vast migration east
is under way --
east, beyond the Urals,
where they plant explosives
in the frozen ground
and rebuild Soviet war production
from scratch.
They work fast
through the grueling winter,
but the motherland's need
is desperate,
and many plants must begin
operating before they have a roof.
By the end of the war,
more than 2,000 new factories
will have sprung up in Siberia,
heavy industrial plants
producing weapons to sustain
the Red Army at the front.
But that army needs men.
And so while Hitler still
keeps men away from the front
for vital factory work,
legions of Soviet children
must rise to aid their homeland
in its hour of peril.
Alongside their mothers
at the lathes,
they toil to complete
the Siberian miracle,
and the future of the Soviet Union
depends on them all --
on the quality of the war machines
they produce,
on the quantity of oil they extract,
and on the barges they pilot
to bring it all to the crisis point
on the Volga. . .
. . .to Stalingrad.
And Stalin, for once,
does not squander their endeavors.
The year's defeats
have shocked him,
and Marshal Zhukov finds
his first counterattack proposals
greeted
with uncharacteristic caution.
lNTERPRETER:
''So, what have you thought up?''
Stalin said as he came over
to our map.
''What front is that?''
Vasilievsky reported back,
''lt's a new front
that needs to be opened
in addition to the Don Front
so that we can make a major thrust
against the German grouping
at Stalingrad.
The left wing
of our Stalingrad Front
will make a thrust towards Kalach
to meet it.''
Stalin says, ''But have we got
enough forces
for such a big operation?
Perhaps we should limit it
to the thrust along the Don
from north to south. . .
. . .and south to north.''
We objected to Stalin
that if we were to do this,
the Germans would quickly deploy
their mechanized troops
from Stalingrad
and parry our thrust.
He said, ''We need to think
about our plan
and calculate
our forces and resources.
The main task now
is to hold Stalingrad,
and don't breathe a word
to anyone about the plan.''
NARRATOR: Nothing must distract
from the last-ditch battle
still being waged inside Stalingrad.
The city has become
a global obsession,
dominating the world's headlines.
And now, more than ever,
Stalin's prestige demands
that it shall not fall.
But there is another reason
to plan in stealth.
The 6th Army must be kept
fully occupied in Stalingrad
while the Red Army
gathers in the rear,
planning its revenge.
While the Soviet Union's
distant allies
beat paths of their own
to the beleaguered city,
British aid carried through the icy
gauntlet of the Murmansk run. . .
. . .or across the lranian border.
And from the USA's
Alaskan airfields,
fighter aircraft fly into Siberia
to aid a Red Army almost ready
to launch its counterstrike.
Artillery Chief Voronov
coordinates planning
along with General Vatutin,
leading the Southwest Front,
Rokossovsky,
commanding the Don Front,
and Eremenko, attended, as ever,
by his political shadow Khrushchev.
Their designs are overseen
by Stalin's
most trusted military advisers,
Zhukov and Vasilievsky.
And on the 1 9th of November,
a huge artillery barrage
by the Southwest Front
pierces the frost,
decimating ill-prepared
Romanian forces in its path.
This is Operation Uranus.
Vatutin's tanks burst through
almost at once.
And Eremenko's southern wing
surges forward on the next day.
The Wehrmacht, taken utterly
by surprise, cannot stop them.
And as its allies collapse
on the flanks,
there are no reserves to stem
the resurgent Red tide.
Within three days,
the Southwest Front
has taken Kalach,
some 80 kilometers
west of Stalingrad.
And on the 23rd of November,
a few miles southwest of Kalach,
its advance units meet up
with Eremenko's forces.
Suddenly, the German 6th Army
and the 4th Panzer Army,
perhaps 300,000
of Hitler's finest troops,
are surrounded inside Stalingrad.
The hunter has been captured
by his prey.
An astonished Hitler summons
Manstein, his troubleshooter,
to Stalingrad.
His sharp troops will breach
the Soviet ring surrounding the city
and secure the prize
Hitler's already promised
to the German people.
Two Soviet armies,
the 5 1st and 2nd Guards,
are rushed to meet
Manstein's relief force
and stop it dead in its tracks.
Former Artillery Sergeant Rasporkin
was with the guards.
lNTERPRETER: Three army corps
of around 400,000 soldiers
were immediately dispatched by foot.
We set up our field guns
as soon as we got there
without even digging in.
lt just wasn't possible to dig in.
There was no time.
Tanks were breaking
through our infantry lines.
l think attitudes and conditions
on both sides
became more and more
inhuman and extreme.
For example, there were
some marines who had been killed
and then crushed into the earth
by the same tanks
that had already annihilated them.
What could they possibly hope
to gain by crushing them
if they were already dead?
NARRATOR: The guards pay
a high price for stopping Manstein.
Almost two thirds of the army
is killed or wounded.
And even faced by Germany's
fearsome new Tiger tanks,
they fight like the elite units
they are.
lNTERPRETER: There were times
in the tank attacks
and artillery barrages
when l couldn't keep my teeth
together for days on end.
They were chattering so much
from fear.
Yes, from fear,
my teeth were chattering,
and there was no way
l could stop them.
On one occasion,
for two days, no less.
And when l knocked out a Tiger
in Gromoslavka, near Stalingrad,
l was so deafened,
l lost my power of speech.
We did not need
blocking units there,
because the guards,
they never stepped back.
And as far as l remember,
our 2nd Guards Army
didn't step back once.
NARRATOR:
There will be no relief now
for German troops in Stalingrad.
Hitler calls them his champions,
but his orders,
no escape and no surrender,
condemn them to death.
And now Göring offers comfort
to the Reich's besieged heroes.
His Luftwaffe will fly
500 tons of supplies per day
into the Stalingrad pocket.
The Luftwaffe tries,
but the Red Army
brings up extra A.A. batteries,
and the lumbering
German transports
are blown out of the sky
in their hundreds.
Soon, even quotas of 50 tons
per day cannot be met.
And as the Red Army
closes the ring around Stalingrad,
advancing cautiously
through the snow,
taking time to bring up
heavy artillery and air support. . .
. . .German defenders,
shivering in the ruins,
are told to fight on,
sustained only by glib promises
of ultimate victory,
along with a little advice
from the Führer --
how to dig a hole in the snow.
Primitive diagrams
that almost mock these grizzled
veterans in their desperation.
And for frostbite, the Führer
recommends a bag over the face.
Yet, like Soviet troops before them,
they entertain no thought
of surrender.
And as they in turn cling to every
bloodstained remnant of the city,
icebound apocalypse
returns to Stalingrad.
German regimental commander
Steidl. . .
''The infantry has been living among
corpses for the last few weeks.
Corpses on the right.
Corpses on the left.
Corpses next to you.
Corpses under you.
And your rifle.''
lNTERPRETER: lf a bullet
is fired from 1 00 to 1 50 meters,
it won't go through a frozen body.
So we just piled them up and
then rested behind them
and took cover.
NARRATOR:
For ordinary soldiers on both sides,
this is the ghastly climax
to a long, dark journey.
lNTERPRETER: We even used
frozen bodies like stones or locks,
throwing them under the wheels
of a vehicle if it got bogged down.
The vehicles would then get
the necessary traction
and move on without a hitch.
Why did we do it?
Because they --
On one occasion,
we took back a village.
lt was beyond the Don.
The locals there told us
how many people
had been burned alive
by the Germans.
They had put all the young people
together in a barn,
covered it with dry hay,
and burned 30 or 40 of them.
So we thought,
''lf you burn people alive,
we will kill you,
we will destroy you.''
There could be no doubt that
these sort of atrocities took place.
You know, they did it absolutely
without any fear of God.
Yes, it's true.
When a vehicle was stuck,
we put one of their corpses under it.
l did it. We all did it.
And do you know why?
Because when l was in that barn
and saw the half-burnt bodies,
l was so furious.
l said, ''See what they've done
with our own people,
our own Don Cossacks.''
And l swore l would pay them back,
although it may have been
in a different kind.
But that incident
with the vehicle really happened,
and l'll never forget it.
NARRATOR: Yes, there is hatred
of the invader in Stalingrad.
And it burns ever deeper
as Soviet troops uncover evidence
of Nazi methods.
This camp held 2,000
of their captured comrades,
and by the time it is liberated,
only 20 are still alive.
And survivors tell
of brutal maltreatment,
of grotesque medical experiments.
ls it any wonder they thirst
for vengeance?
ln the heart of the cauldron,
Hitler's gladiators know now
that they are doomed.
And so, betrayed,
they evacuate a few casualties
on the last plane out of Stalingrad.
And with it go their last words
to families, lovers, friends.
''You should forget it, Marguerite,
and do it right away.
l know you want me beside you,
not only as a husband and a lover,
but as a pianist.
Marguerite, you should know
the whole truth.
l don't have my hands anymore,
not since December.
The little finger is missing
on my left hand,
but even worse,
frostbite took the middle three
fingers on my right hand.
l can only just about hold a mug
using the two fingers l have left.
And l have become rather helpless.
You don't understand how important
these things are until you lose them.
The only thing l can still do properly
is shoot using my little finger.
And l can't shoot all my life, right?
So my hands are useless.
Do you feel better now
that you know the whole truth?''
Ordinary victims resigned
to their fates. . .
. . .abandoned in Hades,
so that their Führer
might save face.
And when a Soviet proposal of terms
passed across the Romanian sector
offers them a chance
for honorable surrender,
Hitler snatches away the hope.
His stark order,
''Fight to the last bullet.''
But though they fight on,
the bullets are running out,
and the Red Army
is still coming at them.
By late January,
they're being overwhelmed,
and whole regiments are giving up
the hopeless struggle.
But as official cameraman
Orlyankin discovers,
every house in Stalingrad
is still a potential death trap.
[ Speaking Russian ]
lNTERPRETER: On the front
where the 1 3th Rodimtsev Division
was fighting,
there was a house,
a basement to be more precise,
where the Germans were
hiding and sniping at us.
lf they saw one of our lads,
they would immediately shoot him.
Well, what happened was this.
Suddenly one of these Fritzes
came running out with a white shirt
and runs towards us
along the basement windows.
So the Fritzes were surrendering
like Antioch.
And so our boys moved slowly
into the open
from out of their trenches
and shelters
because of the white flag.
And at that moment,
just as l was about to start filming,
they opened up
with a terrifying burst
of machine-gun
and submachine-gun fire
coming from almost
all the windows of the building,
and our lads, who had only broken
cover in order to take these POWs.
That was a law, you see.
lf they surrendered,
we had to accept them.
And so our soldiers started falling,
some dead, some wounded,
some just trying to avoid the bullets.
NARRATOR:
Finally, on February the 2nd,
the last German troops fighting
in Stalingrad surrender.
After five long months,
a battle that began
almost by accident is over.
But 6th Army commander Paulus
is not among them.
Historian and wartime
intelligence officer Lev Bezymensky.
[ Speaking Russian ]
lNTERPRETER:
When they started to bring in
the first captured generals,
no one in our reconnaissance unit
was 1 00o/o sure whether Paulus
was alive or dead.
There was a possibility
that he might have been rescued
at the last moment.
ln theory, it would have been possible
to get him out of Stalingrad,
but in practice, no.
So l became a human bug.
You see, in those days,
we did not have the technical
listening equipment we have now.
So yours truly
was put in a German uniform
and made to bunk down
in the same prison dormitory
as the captured German generals.
l had to listen
to what they were saying,
especially in case one of them
started talking about Paulus.
l lay there with my face to the wall
because l was afraid
they might have recognized me.
You see, l had dealt with them
when they had first been captured.
So l just lay there and listened.
Suddenly l heard them
talking about him,
although they didn't
use his name specifically.
There's a German title, ''Ober,''
which means ''commander in chief.''
They were saying
that the Ober had said something
and that he was here
and that he was still here.
So l concluded that Paulus
was still in Stalingrad.
NARRATOR: And when Paulus,
instructed by Hitler to kill himself,
is captured in the basement
of a city store,
Stalin uses him as Hitler had done --
for propaganda.
But though he is berated
before the world's press,
Paulus tells no bitter tales
of treachery,
just name, rank, and serial number.
Along with their commander,
some 9 1 ,000 German survivors
have surrendered.
They have all been Hitler's victims,
and now they are destined
to suffer at Stalin's hands.
For the dictators, roles
have been reversed since Kharkov.
Now, as Hitler counts
the massive cost
of his obsession with Stalin's city,
the Soviet leader gloats
over pictures of captured generals.
But if Stalin, like his enemy,
believes that film is the key
to posterity's blessing,
he is wrong.
The Wehrmacht will never again
trespass so far to the east,
and the victory marks a turning point
in the fortunes of the Soviet Union.
But the great monument
by the Volga
belongs not to men of destiny,
nor to tyrants,
but to ordinary men and women.
She is the motherland.
But she is a mother, too.
Her cry is victory
but also passionate grief
for her children,
for the gladiators,
hurled by uncaring despots
into the abyss of Stalingrad.